feat: add data-grid spec (#3922)
microsoft/fast: specs/data-grid/data-grid.spec.md

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `headerCellsSlot`

**Data grid row**
- `fast-data-grid-row`

*Attributes:*
- `gridTemplateColumns`  
String that gets applied to the the css gridTemplateColumns attribute for the row

*properties:*
- `rowData`  
The objects that contains the data to be displayed in this row.

- `columnsData`  
An array of `DataGridColumn` objects that define what columns will be displayed in the grid.  The order of the columns determines their order in the grid.

- `cellItemTemplate`  
Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use when generating cells by iterating over data.  The default template uses `fast-data-grid-cell`, this is where authors change that.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `cellsSlot`

**Data grid cell**
*Component name:*
- `fast-data-grid-cell`

*Attributes:*
- `gridColumnIndex`  
The grid column this cell appears in.

*properties:*
- `rowData`  
The object that contains the data to be displayed in this row.

- `columnData`  
The `DataGridColumn` this cell represents.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `cellSlot`

> ## Implementation

Reviewer: Can you add some code examples for how a developer would use this component?

Author: Added some samples and explanations.

# Data Grid

## Overview

The `data grid` component enables authors to display an array of data in a tabular layout.  The layout can include a "header" region where a title can be displayed for each column.  

![](./images/grid.png)

`Data grid` actually consists of a number of components that work together:
- `<fast-data-grid>`:  The top level container element
- `<fast-data-grid-header>`: Displays column titles
- `<fast-data-grid-header-cell>`: Displays the title for a single column of cells
- `<fast-data-grid-row>`: Displays a single row of data associated with a single record
- `<fast-data-grid-cell>`: Displays a single cell of data within a row

### Use Cases

> Any time an author wants to display tabular data.

Reviewer: A few real world use cases wouldn't go amiss, some examples https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/05/09/the-process-of-designing-a-product/ you can see a few examples if you scroll down to "Imaginary users".

### Non-goals
- The initial version of the component will not support virtualization or pagination to display large data sets but should be architected to support both in the future.
  
### Features
- Generate a data grid layout based on provided data.

> - Multiple customization points to control the grid display
> - Manages keyboard navigation across the grid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multiple customization points to control the grid display.
- Manages keyboard navigation across the grid.
```

### Risks and Challenges
- It is not yet clear how cells with focusable children work.
- Unique identifiers are not required per row/data item, this may cause an unstable relationships between data rows and component representations.

### Prior Art/Examples

[FAST React](https://github.com/microsoft/fast-react/tree/master/packages/react/fast-components-react-msft/src/data-grid)

[Infragistics](https://www.infragistics.com/products/ignite-ui-web-components/web-components/components/data-grid.html#:~:text=%20Data%20Grid%20Overview%20%201%20Demo.%20,Components%20data%20grid%20to%20the%20above...%20More%20)

[Smart](https://www.htmlelements.com/docs/grid/)

[Vaadin](https://vaadin.com/components/vaadin-grid)

[Open UI](https://open-ui.org/components/table)

---

## Design

> The Fast `Data grid` components enable a high degree of customizability. In addition to being able to set the base styles of the components authors can choose the templates applied to grid and header cells on a per column basis using the properties of `DataGridColumn`. Additionally, authors can specify the templates used during the creation of rows and cells from data sources through the item template properties of the grid and row components (`rowItemTemplate` and `cellItemTemplate`).  Finally, authors can add elements they create and manage themselves through the various element slots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Fast `Data grid` components enable a high degree of customizability. In addition to being able to set the base styles of the components, authors can choose the templates applied to grid and header cells on a per column basis using the properties of `DataGridColumn`. Additionally, authors can specify the templates used during the creation of rows and cells from data sources through the item template properties of the grid and row components (`rowItemTemplate` and `cellItemTemplate`).  Finally, authors can add elements they create and manage themselves through the various element slots.
```

### API

#### The DataGridColumn interface

> Most `data grid` components use the `DataGridColumn` interface.  A `DataGridColumn` is an object that describes the properties of a single column in the grid as follows:

Reviewer: Since backticks are used for code I would instead place emphasis on "data grid" using the double stars to make it bold.

```suggestion
Most **data grid** components use the `DataGridColumn` interface.  A `DataGridColumn` is an object that describes the properties of a single column in the grid as follows:
```

> - `columnDataKey`: A string that identifies which data item should be shown in the column.  For example if the source data had a field called "Name" the `columnDataKey` for the column that displays the values for "Name" would be "Name".

Reviewer: nit: You've used double spaces a bunch here but the AP and Chicago manual of style use a single space, I've put a suggestion below on one place I found them but could you go through and make them single space for the rest of this document? For reference: https://cmosshoptalk.com/2020/03/24/one-space-or-two/

```suggestion
- `columnDataKey`: A string that identifies which data item should be shown in the column. For example, if the source data had a field called "Name" the `columnDataKey` for the column that displays the values for "Name" would be "Name".
```

Author: At this point the "hit the space bar twice after a period" learned in Mr Veysey's grade 10 typing class is somewhat ingrained...

Author: did a double space pass.

- `headerCellTemplate`:  Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use for header cells of this column.

- `cellTemplate`:  Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use for data cells of this column.

Authors can hook up custom events to html elements within cell templates in order to enable user interaction with grid data.

For example a button handler on a `cellTemplate` could be implemented with a click event that calls back to the author's own function:

```html
    <template>
        <button @click="${x => myCustomHandler()}">
            ${x =>
                x.rowData === null ||
                x.columnData === null ||
                x.columnData.columnDataKey === null
                    ? null
                    : x.rowData[x.columnData.columnDataKey]}
        </button>
    </template>
```

**Data grid**
- `fast-data-grid`

*Attributes:*
- `generateHeader`  

> Boolean.  Automatically generate a header element based on provided columns. Default is true.  Authors who wish to not have a header row or wish to generate their own can set this to false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boolean. Automatically generate a header element based on provided columns. The default is `true`. Authors who wish to not have a header row or wish to generate their own can set this to `false`.
```

# Data Grid

## Overview

The `data grid` component enables authors to display an array of data in a tabular layout.  The layout can include a "header" region where a title can be displayed for each column.  

![](./images/grid.png)

`Data grid` actually consists of a number of components that work together:
- `data grid`:  The top level container element
- `data grid header`: Displays column titles
- `data grid header cell`: Displays the title for a single column of cells
- `data grid row`: Displays a single row of data associated with a single record

> - `data grid cell`: Displays a single cell of data within a row

Author: Actually all the components are exposed and an author could choose to construct a grid with the various pieces with markup.

### Use Cases
Any time an author wants to display tabular data.

### Non-goals
- The initial version of the component will not support virtualization or pagination to display large data sets but should be architected to support both in the future.
  
### Features

> - Generates a data grid layout based on provided data.
> - Authors can take advantage of multiple customization points to control the grid display
> - manages keyboard navigation across the grid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Generate a data grid layout based on provided data.
- Multiple customization points to control the grid display.
- Manage keyboard navigation across the grid.
```

### Risks and Challenges

> - not yet clear how cells with focusable children work 
> - we're not requiring unique identifiers per row/data item, do we need to to ensure stable relationships between data rows and component representations?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is not yet clear how cells with focusable children work.
- Unique identifiers are not required per row/data item, this may cause an unstable relationships between data rows and component representations.
```

- `headerCellItemTemplate`  
Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use when generating header cells by iterating over data.  The default template uses `fast-data-grid-header-cell`, this is where authors change that.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `headerCellsSlot`

**Data grid header cell**
- `fast-data-grid-header-cell`

*Attributes:*
- extends HTML Element attributes

*properties:*
- `columnData`  
The `DataGridColumn` this column header represents.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `headerCellsSlot`

**Data grid row**
- `fast-data-grid-row`

*Attributes:*
- `gridTemplateColumns`  
String that gets applied to the the css gridTemplateColumns attribute for the row

*properties:*
- `rowData`  
The objects that contains the data to be displayed in this row.

- `columnsData`  
An array of `DataGridColumn` objects that define what columns will be displayed in the grid.  The order of the columns determines their order in the grid.

> - `cellItemTemplate`  

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused about how all these elements come together. This `fast-data-grid-row` has a default slot to hold items  (items exist as child elements of a row) but it also expects column data and a template to programmatically render the items? Is the intent that either mechanism could be used to render items?

Author: Yes, either can work.  An author could choose to just provide data to the top level grid and have it generate based on that, or could create custom rows and cells using the slots.  I expect the data driven scenario to be the primary one.

Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use when generating cells by iterating over data.  The default template uses `fast-data-grid-cell`, this is where authors change that.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `cellsSlot`

**Data grid cell**
*Component name:*
- `fast-data-grid-cell`

*Attributes:*
- `gridColumnIndex`  
The grid column this cell appears in.

*properties:*

> - `rowData`  

Reviewer 2: Is the cell supposed to have row data?

Reviewer 2: same question about columnData. Wouldn't this represent an item in a row and column?

Author: Yes, cells should have rowdata.  There is not necessarily a 1:1 relationship between columns a specific property in the row data.  For example a grid display could have a column that looks at multiple values in the data row to determine what it displays, such a green checkmark if a student has completed all the assignments represented by multiple items in the rowdata.   This would be done with a custom cell template specified in the column data.

Author: As for columnData, that defines how a particular column should be rendered but does not reference the actual data beyond what property keys to look for.

Author: In the React version we used "column definition" instead of "column data" which may have made this difference clearer. I've been vacillating about whether to use that terminology again.

The object that contains the data to be displayed in this row.

- `columnData`  
The `DataGridColumn` this cell represents.

*Slots:*
- `default`  
Default slot for items

*Events*
- none

*parts:*
- `cellSlot`

## Implementation

The most basic use case for this component would be to just pass it an array of objects for it to render.  

For example given a grid component:
```html
 <fast-data-grid id="defaultGrid"></fast-data-grid>
 ```

 And some data:
 ```js
const baseRows: object[] = [
    { name: "Rob", age: "19" },
    { name: "Bob", age: "20" },
];
 ```

 An author could pass the data to the component from a javascript function:

```js
onLoad(): void {
   const defaultGrid: DataGrid | null = document.getElementById(
        "defaultGrid"
    ) as DataGrid;
    if (defaultGrid !== null) {

>         defaultGrid.rowsData = baseRows;

Reviewer: Is this the first component that has had to have a property set to work, or have we done this in other places and is it an expected pattern? I'm not arguing against it since I think the pattern makes sense here, just curious as to our current component line up and how this will have to affect tooling since we currently assume all components can be implemented sans additional JavaScript implementation.

Author: I initialially had attributes that took data in the form of JSON strings but got feedback from @EisenbergEffect that "web compoent guidance recommends not creating attrs that accept json but using properties that take objects instead".  I kinda prefer the data only approach myself.

Reviewer: Agreed.

    }
}
```

> This renders a basic grid with a column titled "name" and another titled "age".  In addition to the title row there would be two rows of data populated with the values for name and age.  Note that data

Reviewer: "Note that data" <= not sure what is meant to be noted here.

Author: Me either.  Deleted.

    { columnDataKey: "age", title:"Age", columnWidth: "80px" },
];

...
    defaultGrid.columnsData = baseColumns;
...
```

Applying these columns to our previous example results in our columns having the new titles applied as well as having a fixed width for the "Player age" column.

![](./images/ex2.png)

- programmatically generated rows/cells will will be created using [repeat directives](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/using-directives#the-repeat-directive)

- individual cells can be customized using by passing a custom ViewTemplate through the `DataGridColumn` interface for the column in question. These templates are rendered in the light dom within the cell so that authors can create custom cells with interactive elements.

### Accessibility

The `data grid` should align to the interaction model provided by the [W3C](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#grid).

### Globalization

The order of grid columns is inverted in RTL layouts.

### Security

NA

### Performance

We want to take full advantage of fast-element templating and directives for fast rendering.

### Dependencies

None

### Test Plan

> While testing is still TBD for our web components, I would expect this to align with the testing strategy and not require any additional test support.

Reviewer: Can you reword this sentence a little? The words "I" or any other authors "speaker voice" should not be present in a spec. I think we've been a little lax on this in the spec files but they should read fairly "voice" agnostic.

We also do have a testing strategy now for components as put in place by @chrisdholt so this could read: "This component should have Jest component testing in the `@microsoft/fast-foundation` package."

Reviewer 2: Before you add the above, just note that we don't use *Jest* for web components ;)

Reviewer: My bad, I guess it's just `Mocha`.

## Next Steps

> Virtualization and/or Pagination for large data sets.

Reviewer: Can you bullet point these so sections can be expanded and linked for them in the future?

- Supports rendering of slotted elements.

### API

#### The ColumnDefinition interface

Most **data grid** components use the `ColumnDefinition` interface. A `ColumnDefinition` is an object that describes the properties of a single column in the grid as follows:

- `columnDataKey`: A string that identifies which data item should be shown in the column. For example, if the source data had a field called "Name" the `columnDataKey` for the column that displays the values for "Name" would be "Name".

- `title`: The title of the column, if not provided the `columnDataKey` is used instead.

- `headerCellTemplate`: Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use for header cells of this column.

- `headerCellInternalFocusQueue`: Indicates whether the header cell has in internal focus queue. This should be set to `true` for header cells that host controls that need to use arrow keys or have multiple focusable internal elements. When the user hits the Enter or F2 key the element specified by the `cellFocusTargetCallback` function will be focused (see keyboard interactions described [here](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#grid)).

> headerCellFocusTargetCallback: Callback function that takes the cell node as a parameter and returns the HTMLElement to focus in a custom cell. This enables authors to direct focus in a custom cell with interactive elements. When `headerCellInternalFocusQueue` is "false" this function is called when the cell is first focused to immediately move focus to a cell element, for example a cell that contains a button could move focus directly to the button when focused. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is "true" this function is called when the user hits Enter or F2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `headerCellFocusTargetCallback`: Callback function that takes the cell node as a parameter and returns the HTMLElement to focus in a custom cell. This enables authors to direct focus in a custom cell with interactive elements. When `headerCellInternalFocusQueue` is "false" this function is called when the cell is first focused to immediately move focus to a cell element, for example a cell that contains a button could move focus directly to the button when focused. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is "true" this function is called when the user hits Enter or F2.
```

- `cellTemplate`: Custom [template](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/declaring-templates) to use for data cells of this column.

- `cellInternalFocusQueue`: Indicates whether the cell has in internal focus queue. This should be set to `true` for cells that host controls that need to use arrow keys or have multiple focusable internal elements. When the user hits the Enter or F2 key the element specified by the `cellFocusTargetCallback` function will be focused (see keyboard interactions descrived [here](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#grid)).

> - `cellFocusTargetCallback`: Callback function that takes the cell node as a parameter and returns the `HTMLElement` to focus in a custom cell. This enables authors to direct focus in a custom cell with interactive elements. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is "false" this function is called when the cell is first focused to immediately move focus to a cell element, for example a cell that contains a button could move focus directly to the button when focused. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is "true" this function is called when the user hits Enter or F2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cellFocusTargetCallback`: Callback function that takes the cell node as a parameter and returns the `HTMLElement` to focus in a custom cell. This enables authors to direct focus in a custom cell with interactive elements. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is `false` this function is called when the cell is first focused to immediately move focus to a cell element, for example a cell that contains a button could move focus directly to the button when focused. When `cellInternalFocusQueue` is `true` this function is called when the user hits Enter or F2.
```

![](./images/ex2.png)

- Programmatically generated rows/cells will will be created using [repeat directives](https://fast.design/docs/fast-element/using-directives#the-repeat-directive).

- Individual cells can be customized using by passing a custom `ViewTemplate` through the `ColumnDefinition` interface for the column in question. These templates are rendered in the light DOM within the cell so that authors can create custom cells with interactive elements.

### Accessibility

The `data grid` should align to the interaction model provided by the [W3C](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#grid).

### Globalization

The order of grid columns is inverted in RTL layouts.

### Security

NA

### Performance

We want to take full advantage of fast-element templating and directives for fast rendering.

### Dependencies

None

### Test Plan
This component should have component testing in the @microsoft/fast-foundation package.

## Next Steps

- Virtualization and/or Pagination for large data sets.
- Add support for cell selection.

> - Horizontal grid layout?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Investigate a horizontal grid layout
```
